
If you think our recent winters seem warmer than when you were a kid, you're not imagining it.
The average low temperature for December-February in Minnesota this year came in at XX degrees, continuing a gradual upward climb in winter low temperatures that climatologists attribute to climate change.
Sure, there are winters (like 2013-14) that buck that trend, but there are others (like 2011-12) that are significantly above average, too. Plotting the average low temperatures back to 1900 and using statistical procedures to generate a trend line shows a clear rise, most prominent the past 35 years.
During the first 16 years of the 20th century, only six winters had an average low temperature above zero. In the same time period this century, we've had 13 winters with an average above zero.
The low temperature readings are creeping up in all months of the year and throughout the U.S., but it's most evident in winter and in the parts of the world that have the most pronounced winters -- like Minnesota.
"The farther north you go, the stronger you see this," says Kenny Blumenfeld, a climatologist in the State Climatology Office of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Blumenfeld explained that this warming trend is most noticeable in winter because times of limited sunshine -- night and winter -- are when earth typically loses the most heat, resulting in lower temperatures. But greenhouse gases have been acting like a blanket, preventing the heat from leaving.
This blanket is also holding back the extreme low temperatures we typically see in the winter. Up until the mid-1970s, it was relatively common to have one or more days each winter dipping down to -25 or lower in the Twin Cities. But the Cities haven't sunk that low since 1996-97 when it hit -27. 
But something else that is playing a role in the rising low temperatures, especially in the Twin Cities, is a phenomenon known as the "heat island" effect.
Just look at the low temperatures recorded each year in the Twin Cities versus those recorded in St. Cloud. It's typically 5 to 10 degrees warmer in the metro area, where larger concentrations of buildings and pavement make it warmer. 
One of the unanswered questions, says another state climatologist Pete Boulay, is whether the recent rise in coldest temperatures in St. Cloud might be due to this "heat island" effect creeping north.
A program at the University of Minnesota, called "Islands in the Sun," is researching this phenomena, aiming to provide suggestions for minimizing this effect in the future. (As an aside, the program is looking for homeowners willing to host temperature sensors in their yards. More information: http://islands.environment.umn.edu/network/)
For those who love a hot summer, the bad news is that the maximum temperatures in July are one of the only temperature metrics not going up, Blumenfeld said. But he added that we should probably tack the word "yet" onto the end of that sentence. 
We haven't been hitting the big triple-digit temperatures in the summer lately because of high moisture levels, which puts a limit on both how hot or how cold it can get. But that could change.
"Some of the models suggest that by the time we get to the middle of the century, parts of Minnesota may have five to 15 additional days above 95 degrees each year," Blumenfeld said.